Date: Sun, 27 Feb 2011 22:04:31 +0000
Categories: portfolio
_mf_write_panel_id: 1
full_image: floridagrandoperalettheseductionbegin.jpg
thumb_image: flgrandopera.jpg
site_link: http://portfolio.arborwebsolutions.com/001/
year: 2010
featured_project: false
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2011/02/001-florida-grand-opera/
Summary: Putting a focus on what's on stage.

# 001: Florida Grand Opera

As the first full week of 2010 comes to a close, I have one new design
to add to my portfolio. I set two new designs per week as my New Years’
resolution for this year, and I plan to fulfill my original goal of 104
new designs this year even if I don’t strictly stick to the 2-per-week
scheme. On to the design itself. For my first design, I re-did the
website for the Florida Grand Opera. The original FGO site was quite
good, but it didn’t do much to inform interested ticket buyers about
what was currently being performed or how to buy tickets. My re-worked
design moves the side navigation to a horizontal bar across the top of
the site, using the freed-up space to display news items instead and
leaving the main content area for displaying information about the
currently-scheduled performance. Click the image to interact with the
new design; you can also see the original site. Is this design perfect?
Hardly. There are a large number of items from the original site that I
left out in creating this new design which would have to be added back –
sponsor logos across the bottom, links to Facebook and other social
media sites, and the PDF brochure (which, compared to the original
website, is simply stunning – I was very surprised that more of the
PDF’s assets were not used to create their website). But for a week of
on-and-off effort, I’m pleased with the result.
