Date: Sun, 27 Feb 2011 22:08:55 +0000
Categories: portfolio
worktype: Design and development
full_image: miamitoyota54.jpg
thumb_image: miamitoyota.jpg
site_link: http://portfolio.arborwebsolutions.com/003/
year: 2010
featured_project: false
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2011/02/003-car-dealership/
Summary: Slideshow effects with jQuery Cycle and dropdown menus. 

# 003: Car Dealership

Here’s design number 3 of 104, a fictional car dealership named “Miami
Toyota.” With this design, I wanted to use some JavaScript techniques; I
used the jQuery “Cycle” plugin to create a photo slideshow, with CSS3′s
rgba color support to create a transparent banner under each photo. I
also used the “Son of Suckerfish” dropdown menu technique to create a
horizontal navigation bar at the top of the site (the original
proof-of-concept of the technique at A List Apart used a demo site about
lampreys). Visually, the design emphasizes the cars themselves, with
additional emphasis on dealership specials (on the left, in a dark grey
box) and a simple contact form to let the dealership’s sales
professionals follow up with interested customers. The central area
provides a convenient place for the dealership to announce news items
and sales on the site’s front page. The site makes great use of
manufacturer stock photography. It is common practice for auto
manufacturers to provide large portions of their associated dealerships’
websites, but my intent here was to fully integrate those portions into
the site as a whole. Too many dealership websites look like a mish-mash
of professional and amateur work, with little attention paid to
information architecture or overall design.
