Date: Sun, 27 Feb 2011 22:10:47 +0000
Categories: portfolio
worktype: Design and development
full_image: heartofmiamirealestate.jpg
thumb_image: heartofmiami.jpg
site_link: http://portfolio.arborwebsolutions.com/004
year: 2010
featured_project: false
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2011/02/004-south-florida-real-estate/
Summary: A two-way content scroller using jQuery Tools.

# 004: South Florida Real Estate

It’s a bit late in the week, but luckily Design 004 is good enough to
compensate. This design is for a fictional South Florida real estate
firm, “Heart of Miami,” selling condos and homes in and around the
beaches. I created the firm’s logo in Photoshop (since I don’t own a
copy of Illustrator) by piecing together photos of skyscrapers, a neon
sign in the shape of a heart, and Photoshop’s stroke, outer glow, and
inner glow blending filters. I had originally intended to create the
logo using Google SketchUp, but learning to use SketchUp was taking too
much time. I’m definitely interested in that program, though, and I hope
to add elements designed in SketchUp to a future design. On to the
technology. The main feature of this site is the combined vertical and
horizontal scroll box featuring photos of each condo complex. This was
achieved using the jQuery Tools library from FlowPlayer and its
“scrollable” plugin. The vertical column on the left is a single
scrollable which acts as the navigation for the “pages”, and each “page”
is a horizontal scrollable. This setup could be expanded for additional
properties by allowing the vertical scrollable to work in the same way
as the horizontal scrollables – displaying four properties at a time,
and having “next” and “previous” buttons to show additional properties.
This site also uses Cufón to show headings and links in Futura. I am
certainly interested in CSS3′s @font-face property, but I’m waiting for
the dust to settle before embracing it wholeheartedly. As always, you
can interact with this new design on my separate portfolio site. I’m
working on integrating the portfolio site into the current site’s
“Portfolio” page. Be sure to check out the keyboard navigation – up/down
to change pages, and left/right to change photos.
