Date: Sun, 27 Feb 2011 22:13:14 +0000
Categories: portfolio
worktype: Design and development
full_image: miamibeachcinematheque.jpg
thumb_image: mbcinema.jpg
site_link: http://portfolio.arborwebsolutions.com/005
year: 2010
featured_project: false
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2011/02/005-art-house-cinema/
Summary: More CSS3 - rotation, RGBA color modes, and more.

# 005: Art House Cinema

Today, I present Design 005, a re-imagining of the Miami Beach
Cinematheque‘s website. The MBC currently has a Flash-powered website
that also links in a boilerplate ticket ordering site from Tix.com. I
liked the style of the existing site, but the use of Flash didn’t add
anything to the site, while simultaneously making the site harder to
update and totally unusable on the iPhone. So, I sought to re-work the
site’s overall feel using only CSS3 and JavaScript, while updating the
layout to entice new visitors. The site’s title in the upper-left is
positioned using CSS3 Transforms, rotating the headers -5 degrees and
giving them 20 pixels of top margin to keep them legible. This solution
degrades nicely in browsers that don’t support (all of) CSS3, appearing
as standard, horizontal headers. The headers are also given a
transparent background with RGBA color. The site uses the excellent
Museo font for its headers thanks to Cufón. The site navigation in the
upper right has rounded corners thanks to border-radius, and the same
transparent background as the headers. The current film section is set
to a fixed height with overflow: auto to get vertical scrolling. I chose
this setup because it allows visitors not as interested in the current
film to see that there is additional content underneath without
scrolling, while allowing interested readers to learn more about the
film without clicking to a new page. Upcoming films are presented with
their film posters and the dates of their showings below the current
film. The background image for the site comes from the 1923 Harold Lloyd
film “Safety Last!“, chosen because I feel it evokes a sense of whimsy
and a connection to film history. The original image from the film was
given a color overlay layer and some artistic filters in Photoshop to
help it blend into the background.
