Date: Mon, 28 Feb 2011 14:30:49 +0000
Categories: portfolio
worktype: Design and development
full_image: coralgablestribune.jpg
thumb_image: coralgablestribune98.jpg
site_link: http://portfolio.arborwebsolutions.com/006
year: 2010
featured_project: false
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2011/02/006-local-newspaper/
Summary: Fresh styles for a venerable community website.

# 006: Local Newspaper

Two days after Design 005, here’s \#006: a re-work of the Coral Gables
Tribune, a free weekly newspaper distributed at retail stores in the
area. The current site for the newspaper uses a Flash component to
display the print version of the newspaper in exact page-by-page detail,
including pages of ads. The Flash version of the paper is displayed too
small to read easily, and the “zoom” function only makes things slightly
better. The challenge for me was to create a more reader-friendly
layout, while still letting the newspaper sell ads both in its paper and
on its website. To solve the advertising problem, I created a vertical
column on the right side of the design to hold 125×125 pixel ads. This
size is smaller than the ads the site currently offers, but I feel this
is offset by the positioning of the ads directly next to the content,
rather than at the very bottom of the site. The redesign has space for
five of these ads. To solve the readability problem, I changed the
central content area into a photo index of the issue’s ten top stories.
The featured story gets a wider display area, and the remaining nine
form a grid underneath. Furthermore, the “Community News” section,
generally found in the middle of the paper, gets a sidebar on the left
for excerpts from the first few stories, with a link to the full
community news section. The site’s original horizontal navigation at the
top of the site was transformed into three lists of links each in the
header. This groups the links by type, and also echoes the grid
structure of the article photos underneath. Finally, I kept the grid
layout for the paper’s eight columnists below the main content area, but
tweaked the layout a bit to give it a more open look. There is slightly
more spacing between each columnist’s grid space, and I got rid of the
large borders around each grid space as well.
