Date: Sun, 28 Mar 2010 02:59:14 +0000
Tags: books,business,seth godin
Categories: journal
dsq_thread_id: 445814952
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/03/are-you-indispensable/
Summary: My thoughts on Seth Godin's "Linchpin".

# Are You Indispensable?

So I started reading Seth Godin's "[Linchpin][]" a few days ago, and I
have to say I really like it. There's plenty of talk about how the
current educational system is really great for turning out factory
drones, and how it beats out ideas like creativity or independent
thought. The thing that I found most interesting, though, is the way
Godin criticizes "[The E-Myth Revisited][]," the first business book I
ever read that really resonated with me. For those who don't know, the
central idea of "E-Myth" is that new businesses should be set up as if
they were a McDonald's: every single part of the business needs to be
systematized and documented in manuals to the point that you could
operate the whole thing as a franchise. When I read that book years ago,
it gave me an entirely new outlook on how I do my work - as well as
planting a lot of ideas in my head about escape plans and what to do
when "owning a job" didn't really interest me anymore. So what is
Godin's criticism? Well, as he says, anyone who's been through the US
educational system can be taught to read instructions and follow orders.
***If your whole business can be summarized into rulebooks, anyone else
can implement it without you.* That's not being indispensable, that's
just being stupid.** That one idea really got me thinking. **How can you
bring humanity - real, honest-to-goodness individuality - into a
business, and yet still be able to take a vacation without everything
falling apart?** Maybe it's impossible. For at least the next few weeks
though, that's going to be the question that keeps me up at night.

  [Linchpin]: http://www.amazon.com/dp/1591843162
    "Amazon.com: Linchpin by Seth Godin (Hardcover)"
  [The E-Myth Revisited]: http://www.amazon.com/dp/0887307280
    "Amazon.com: The E-Myth Revisited"
