Date: Mon, 09 Nov 2009 15:42:41 +0000
Categories: journal
Tags: crush it,misc
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/crushing-it/
Summary: A review of Gary Vaynerchuk's latest book.

# Crushing It

It's been about a week since I finished reading [Gary Vaynerchuk][]'s
"[Crush It!][]: Why NOW is the time to cash in on your passion". The
book is incredibly motivating and engaging, giving you a bit of Gary's
history and a roadmap for converting your time and passion into a
personal brand and the chance to do what you love for a living. "Doing
what you love" is literally just that, even if the thing you love is tea
or scrapbooking or Polish tableware. "Crushing it" is becoming an expert
in what you love, and sharing that passion with everyone to become known
as the friendly, enthusiastic expert you are. Once you're known as an
expert, you have a variety of options to "cash in" - advertise on your
blog / podcast / video series, get a book deal, sell your content to
someone who wants to build a business around it, start public speaking.
There are loads of possibilities, as long as you are willing to first
put in the hustle that's needed to get to that point. 

As you can probably tell, "Crush It!" has changed the way I think about what I do
online. My blog is no longer something I get to every week or two "when
I have time;" it's a daily activity for me, and I've come to take a lot
of enjoyment from it. After all, why wouldn't writing about the thing
you are most passionate about be fun? Maybe you don't like writing; you
could still start a podcast, or record videos for Youtube. The point is
that you need to build up a stockpile of evidence that you have a
passion, material that shows the whole world that you really care when
it comes to what you're talking about, content that demonstrates you're
taking the time to become an expert in your field. Even if "your field"
is stickers, or baby clothing, or statues of ants. When you've got the
content machine rolling, you will also want to connect with people.
Become active on Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn. Don't just wait for
people to contact you for your advice - actively find and interact with
people who are talking about your field. Writing in your blog is like
starting a new conversation, but you also need to be tapping into the
millions of conversations that are already happening around you every
day. [Twitter Search][] can help you immensely in this process. I'll be
writing more about how to use Twitter tomorrow, but the idea is that
being an expert is worthless if all you do is sit in your cave alone all
day (I'm talking to you in the back row. Yes, you.) There's also the
world of *other people's blogs*. Unless your field is incredibly niche,
you're bound to come across other people just as interested in your
topic as you are. Seek out those blogs, read what their authors have to
say, and leave comments on their blogs. And don't just say "Great post."
Say something meaningful! Tell the author why you agree or disagree;
point the author at other resources on the web they might not know
about; ask questions. If you are sincerely interested in what they have
to say, then let them know that in your comments. These people are not
your competition. You're both interested in spreading your passion, so
help each other out as much as you can.

Be helpful, be friendly, but
most of all, be you. It all comes down to authenticity. Be the authentic
you, because people can tell when you're faking. When someone follows me
on Twitter and I follow them back, if I get an automated direct message
saying "Thanks for following me! Check out my blog here," I immediately
put them in a "not a real person" folder in my head. I don't have time
to deal with someone whose only interest in me is marketing their
product / service at me. I'm not interested in reading your blog if you
don't even acknowledge me as a real person. I already get enough junk
mail every day, and if you are talking to me like you're junk mail, you
will end up in the same place - my trash can. Be the real you, say the
things you would say if you were talking in real life. Don't try to
"filter" your online identity, because filtered comes across as fake,
and no one likes fake. 

To sum it all up, for the last week I've been
hustling. I've been posting to this blog every day (except Sunday, but I
think that's just a transitional phase and I'll be up to 7-days-a-week
posting soon), I've been actively seeking out similar people on Twitter,
and I've been engaging with other bloggers around the world. That is on
top of my normal work day, because sharing my passion is that important.
Has it been paying off? Definitely. It's only been a week, and I'm
already receiving twice as many visitors per day to my blog, and my
followers on Twitter have gone from about twenty to over 100. Will I be
cashing in anytime soon? No. Right now, I'm just enjoying the ride, and
I plan to continue that for as long as I possibly can. How about you?
Have you been crushing it yourself? Do you want to after reading this
post? Leave me a comment below and I'll be in touch. P.S. - I'm in the
process of making a new theme for this blog. Expect something similar,
but much better, ETA TBA.

  [Gary Vaynerchuk]: http://twitter.com/garyvee
  [Crush It!]: http://www.amazon.com/dp/0061914177
  [Twitter Search]: http://search.twitter.com
