Date: Sat, 22 May 2010 16:38:13 +0000
Categories: journal
Tags: gaming,mac,misc,news,steam
dsq_thread_id: 449880242
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/05/steam-for-mac-the-future-of-mac-gaming/
Summary: Bringing the App Store model to desktop gaming.

# Steam for Mac - The Future of Mac Gaming?

Last week, the team at Steam [released a Mac client][] for their popular
gaming service. This is big news, and not just for Steam itself; Steam
represents Mac OS X's best chance of becoming a viable gaming platform.
For years, Mac gaming has been primarily focused on iPhone OS devices. A
large percentage of App Store sales are for games, and the iPod Touch
(and now iPad) is being pushed as a competitor to the Nintendo DS and
Sony PSP. 

The Mac desktop, however, was largely neglected. Big PC
releases would find their way to Mac months or years later, after an
intermediary company had ported the Windows version. Often, these ports
had their own quirks and bugs. The Mac was never a first-class gaming
citizen. 

Steam just might change that, however. For those unfamiliar
with Steam, it's essentially an iTunes for gaming. Users create a Steam
account that, through the Steam client software, offers a store for
downloadable games, tracks purchases, and installs and updates purchased
games. Steam games can even be launched through the client, making it a
one-stop solution for gaming. What really makes Steam special, though,
is the amount of support they've received from game publishers. Steam
offers its own DRM, with periodic online verification. The entire system
is tied to a Steam account and handled in a transparent manner - users
never have to enter a serial number or install game-specific,
system-altering DRM software. As a result, big-name releases are often
available for download through Steam on the same day as their retail
release. 

Since Steam has been so well-received by Windows users, the
release of a Mac Steam client could signal the beginning of a major
shift in Mac gaming. Publishers finally have an incentive to release Mac
versions of their games, since a proven distribution system is now in
place for end users to buy them. Mac market share is steadily growing,
and if Steam makes the Mac a viable target for game publishers, Windows
will lose yet another competitive advantage.

  [released a Mac client]: http://store.steampowered.com/news/3818/
