Date: Fri, 16 Sep 2011 14:28:00 +0000
Categories: journal
Tags: blogofile,lion,text editors,vim,wordpress,xcode
dsq_thread_id: 421741902
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2011/09/text-editors-in-lion-and-a-quick-update/
Summary: In which I talk about coming home to Vim, and spill some details on what's next for Arbor Web Solutions.

# Text Editors in Lion, and a Quick Update

A few days ago I moved to a new computer, and with it I upgraded to Mac
OS X Lion. Lion's new full-screen mode is great, especially when
combined with a three-finger swipe to switch between full-screen apps. I
normally use Coda as my main text editor on Mac, but I decided it was
time for a change. I was mostly excited to try out Xcode 4, since I
frequently used Xcode 3's Organizer view as a generic file browser /
editor.

Well, Xcode 4 totally re-worked the Organizer view, and the result is a
lot less useful for generic HTML/CSS/JavaScript development. I tried
Dashcode, but it seems very tied to Apple's set of web components.
Fraise, another old standby, doesn't support Lion's full-screen mode;
Smultron, on which it was based, does, but is now much uglier looking
and there are reports that it crashes frequently. I tried TextWrangler,
and liked its FTP browser, but found it a bit alien.

So, after trying all kinds of text editors, I finally ended up [coming
home to Vim][]. The latest snapshot of MacVim supports most of Lion's
new features, most notably full-screen mode. This might finally give me
a reason to get good with Vim, which would be great since it's installed
on the vast majority of servers out there.

As far as accessing files to edit in Vim, I've been using [Transmit
4][]'s "Disks" feature to mount remote servers as local drives. Saving
causes a delay of a few seconds, but I haven't found it to be an issue.

### In other news...

I've caught the redesign bug once again, but this time I'm going a bit
more far-ranging than making the site responsive. In a quest to reduce
page load time even further, I'm implementing [Adaptive Images][] and
switching the site to a new platform - [Blogofile][].

WordPress has been good to me, and I still see myself using it for the
majority of my client work, but it has some issues that have always
bothered me. Most of the functionality I like to use comes in the form
of custom fields, which essentially make one big database table full of
stuff from all over the site. Because custom fields are, well, custom,
the majority of tools for working with WordPress don't have any support
for them. Meaning I always have to go back to the WordPress website to
make changes or "polish up" posts before publishing them.

Blogofile works especially well in the outside tools department (which
is fitting, since it does not have an admin website of its own). Posts
in Blogofile are simple [Markdown][] text files, with a [YAML][] header
for things like which template to use or what would be, in WordPress,
custom fields. What makes Blogofile truly different though is that the
output of a Blogofile site is plain, static HTML. There is no database,
and requests do not have to be processed by an interpreter. You just
write your posts in Markdown, set up your templates, and then run the
Blogofile script, which creates the static pages to deploy on your
server.

The result is a fast, incredibly secure website that can be edited in
full from almost anywhere. Does this mean that I'll be using Blogofile
in client work? No. Blogofile requires users to learn Markdown, and to
directly access the server to upload photos or edit posts. There is no
website "control panel" or "dashboard" to log into, and the site has to
be re-built every time changes are made. This can be automated with Git,
but that would be yet another thing that clients would have to learn.

Work on the redesign is moving along slowly, but I hope to have it in
place by the end of the year. In the meantime, I encourage you to leave
a comment with your thoughts on my move away from WordPress for this
site.

*(N.B.: You may notice that this post does not have a "featured image" -
this is yet another feature that is not supported by WordPress clients
without hacky workarounds. Since I'm writing this post on the iPad, I
can't add a featured image. In Blogofile, it's not a problem.)*

  [coming home to Vim]: http://stevelosh.com/blog/2010/09/coming-home-to-vim/
    "Coming Home to Vim"
  [Transmit 4]: http://panic.com/transmit/
  [Adaptive Images]: http://adaptive-images.com/
  [Blogofile]: http://www.blogofile.com/
  [Markdown]: http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/
  [YAML]: http://yaml.org/
