Date: Thu, 06 May 2010 19:23:23 +0000
Categories: journal
Tags: browsers,chrome,firefox,gecko,internet explorer,opera,presto,trident,webkit
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/05/the-browser-wars-round-2/
Summary: The Big Three rendering engines, and what they mean for the future of the Web.

# The Browser Wars, Round 2

Last week I started using [Opera 10.53][] on my Macbook at a friend's
recommendation. It's blazing fast, even faster than [Chrome][] if you
can believe that. It has great support for HTML5 and CSS3, and nice
extras like Speed Dial and a tiny marker that lets you know when a tab
has updated content or finished loading, so you don't have to waste your
time checking on a slow-loading (or repeatedly-reloading) website over
and over. It even has solid developer tools (Opera Dragonfly), with a
built-in zooming website color picker! 

It was almost everything I could
want in a browser, and I was happy as could be. Then I realized that
Opera's dev tools don't include a screen ruler, a tool I use all the
time through Chrome's [Pendule][] extension. No problem, I thought -
Opera has its own extensions, called "widgets." Except, they don't seem
to work - I found a screen ruler widget in less than a minute, but it
refused to properly install, and once it was done I still couldn't
actually run it. 

Annoyed, I went on to find further annoyances.
Amazon.com doesn't allow Opera to use the "Look Inside" feature. Opera's
aggressive pop-up blocking led to sites that rely heavily on pop-ups
becoming unusable, even when pop-up blocking was turned off. Some sites
refuse to serve content to Opera at all, putting up a message that only
Internet Explorer, Safari, and Firefox are supported. Opera does feature
a handy user-agent switcher to trick these sites into thinking it's
Firefox, but that actually leads to further problems. Google, for
example, actually does the right thing when it comes to Opera support,
but GMail became a scrambled mess with my user-agent string set to
Firefox. 

So, while the original browser wars are well behind us, and
while standards-based development has easily become the norm, we're not
out of the woods yet. **The new battleground is the established trio of
renderers - Trident, Gecko, and WebKit - vs. everyone else.** While
these three represent the vast majority of browsers in the world, things
were not always this way, and site developers would do well to code to
the standards and not to the popular rendering engines of the day. If
your site really does have some advanced features, test for browser
capabilities, not for the specific browser in use. That way, you'll
avoid what is surely the most embarrassing gaffe I've come across while
using Opera - disney.com doesn't recognize Opera, and so it assumes that
you're using an iPhone! 

*[If you're wondering what browser I actually
use after all that ranting, the answer is Opera. I've really come to
like it, and when an individual site doesn't work right, it's fast and
easy to fire up Chrome, or even Firefox for those truly annoying sites.
Don't even get me started on government sites that only open in Internet
Explorer.]*

  [Opera 10.53]: http://www.opera.com
  [Chrome]: http://www.google.com/chrome
  [Pendule]: https://chrome.google.com/extensions/detail/gbkffbkamcejhkcaocmkdeiiccpmjfdi
