Date: Tue, 17 Nov 2009 17:25:33 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: plugins,techniques,themes,wordpress
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/5-tips-for-wordpress-theming/
Summary: Follow these tips, and your next WordPress theme will be a piece of cake.

# 5 Tips for WordPress Theming

My post rate has been slowing down over the last week, and I apologize
for that. I had a fire to put out that took most of my attention, and
I'm also working on a new theme for this blog (and for the site as a
whole). It will be ready to go by next week, but I wanted to take this
opportunity to talk a bit about developing themes for WordPress and some
of the cool things I've come across while working on my own redesign.

### Start in HTML, but make it WP-ready

Like in any design, I started by first coding my redesign as a static,
semantic HTML page, and adding CSS and JavaScript to get it looking the
way I wanted. However, what really helped in converting the page to a
theme was structuring my HTML in a way that (at least somewhat) matched
the structure that WordPress would have to use. I made sure that the
static page had separate divs for the header, content, sidebar, and
footer, and that the "content" section could be used as a container for
further WordPress-specific structure like post content and comments
templates. I also made sure that my redesign would have a place to put
WordPress' search form and lists of categories and archives. Thinking
about what WordPress would need gave my code some early direction and
sped up the process of converting it once I was ready.

### Think about the templates you'll need

Unlike most static websites, a WordPress theme is going to need a
variety of templates. Most of these will be variations on a theme, but
it helps to give some thought ahead of time to what those templates
should look like as individuals. You'll definitely want to sketch
templates for single posts (single.php), archives (archive.php),
category pages (category.php), and the "404" or "Page not found"
template (404.php). Identify the common features of those templates and
incorporate them into index.php to give your site a more unified,
consistent look.

### Use a good set of demo data

Unless you already have an extensive set of posts and comments, it's a
good idea to download a demo dataset like the [Sandbox dummy content][].
This will give you a collection of posts that encompasses every possible
scenario you could have in a blog post - elements like headings 3-6,
code, and blockquotes; images within posts; posts with open or closed
comments and trackbacks - to test your new theme against. Without using
such a dataset, it's all too easy to forget about things that should be
styled until you are ready to publish your post, forcing you to spend
extra time hunting down bugs when you're likely already busy.

### Find plugins to do work for you

One of WordPress' greatest strengths is the incredible development
community that has grown up around it. There are WordPress plugins to
help you add just about any feature you might want to your site, whether
that's [importing external RSS feeds][], adding your [Twitter stream][],
making it easy for readers to [share your posts][], or even [adding a
contact form][]. Some plugins can be extremely powerful; for example,
[Kyle Fiedler][] recently introduced me to the [Art Direction plugin][],
which allows you to assign a custom CSS file to each post in your blog -
see his site for [examples][].

### Finally, just get it done!

Once you've thought everything through and created a static design that
you're proud of, don't just stop there! Getting that new theme finished
will help out your portfolio, your personal brand / image, and if
nothing else, it'll definitely give you a feeling of accomplishment to
see the new theme in action. Have you been considering a new theme for
your blog, or are you looking to start a blog? Please leave a comment
below with any advice or questions you might have, and I will try to
answer as best I can.

  [Sandbox dummy content]: http://sndbx.org/wp-content/uploads/sndbx-dummy-content.zip
  [importing external RSS feeds]: http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/simplepie-plugin-for-wordpress/
    "SimplePie"
  [Twitter stream]: http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/twitter-for-wordpress/
    "Twitter for WordPress"
  [share your posts]: http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/share-this/
    "ShareThis"
  [adding a contact form]: http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/contact-form-7/
    "Contact Form 7"
  [Kyle Fiedler]: http://kylefiedler.com/
  [Art Direction plugin]: http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/art-direction/
  [examples]: http://kylefiedler.com/category/articles/
