Date: Sun, 02 May 2010 12:31:16 +0000
Tags: akihabara,flash,games,javascript,technologies
Categories: articles
dsq_thread_id: 421962353
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/05/akihabara-replacing-flash-games-with-javascript/
Summary: Flash's days are numbered. Make the switch to JavaScript.

# Akihabara - Replacing Flash Games with JavaScript

I recently saw an impressive new JavaScript game engine called
[Akihabara][]. Take a look at it if you haven't already - it's really
quite spectacular. The Akihabara site has demos of five complete games
built using the engine, and while they're somewhat rough, the experience
is what's truly impressive. Why so impressive? Well, for starters, these
games are built using nothing more than JavaScript and the HTML5 canvas
element. While HTML5 alone does not make something an instant Flash
killer (see the continuing saga of efforts to usurp Flash with the HTML5
video element), Akihabara is incredibly smooth. Each demo, while fairly
rudimentary, controls flawlessly. There are no frame rate hiccups, no
input lag, and no jerky animation. The demos are completely playable,
easily on par with your average flash game, and decidedly better than
some punch-the-monkey banner ad. The fact that these demos were built
with JavaScript adds another interesting benefit - the full source of
each game is only a few clicks away! Because the Akihabara engine is
doing most of the heavy lifting, the game code that remains is clean and
very readable. Levels for 2d scrolling games are nothing more than an
array of images, and enemy AI takes up just a few lines for each type of
enemy. I don't know the limitations of the engine yet, but it seems like
most any 8-bit era game could probably be ported to JavaScript without
too much of a hassle. So, does this mean that the future of casual
gaming is JavaScript? Unfortunately, probably not. While the performance
of Akihabara is impressive, the fact that source code is easily
available makes it unlikely that serious commercial projects will choose
this route. However, the relative simplicity of making games with this
JavaScript framework means that we can probably expect a lot of new
games written by enthusiasts - like those who submit Flash games to
sites like [Newgrounds][] - to use JavaScript, for access to the iPhone
/ iPad market if nothing else.

  [Akihabara]: http://www.kesiev.com/akihabara/ "Akihabara"
  [Newgrounds]: http://newgrounds.com
