Date: Sun, 11 Apr 2010 19:25:42 +0000
Tags: cufon,jquery,raphael,svg,techniques,technologies
Categories: articles
dsq_thread_id: 421848936
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/04/comprehensive-guide-to-using-cufon-text-with-raphael/
Summary: How to add some TTF to your SVG.

# Comprehensive Guide to Using Cufón Text with Raphaël

*[Note: I'm starting this post with a look at a specific problem and why
I chose to use Raphaël in the first place. If you want to get straight
to the point, scroll down to "Using Text in Raphaël".]* I recently had
the opportunity to re-create a Flash component in JavaScript. The
component in question was a horizontal accordion that opened slides
based on mouse hover. It looked really cool, and it de-saturated the
color slide backgrounds for non-active slides. [Here][] is the actual
component I was re-building. So, my first step was to pull out jQuery. I
quickly ran across a problem, though: each slide has a title that runs
vertically up the slide. I couldn't use text burned into the image,
because the slide titles had to be editable by the client. I couldn't
use CSS3 rotation, because the site had to support Internet Explorer,
which as of version 8, doesn't know what to do with anything in CSS3.
What to do? The answer was more JavaScript. I decided to use
[Raphaël][], a library that lets you easily make SVG canvases on a page
and interact with them through standard JavaScript events. Best of all,
Raphaël integrates nicely with Cufón, so you can make a Cufón font file,
draw shapes from that font, and then work with them in a Raphaël canvas.

### Rotation Differences

I set up a prototype that featured the vertical titles, which animated
into a horizontal position at the top of the slide when that slide is
active. This worked great, aside from my left-aligned text becoming
center-aligned after rotation. I figured it was just a quirk of SVG, and
I left it at that. Until, that is, I switched my default text to Cufón
text. Now, the .rotate('-90') command that made my default text vertical
had a very different effect - the text string stayed horizontal, but
each character rotated -90 degrees within that horizontal text string! I
spent hours reading everything I could find about text handling in
Raphaël, SVG, and Microsoft's VML, and noticed many other people having
similar problems, particularly with text alignment after rotation. Here,
then, is the collected wisdom of all that searching.

### Using Text in Raphaël

Ok, first set up your Cufón files. You may already be using Cufón on
your site. Whether you are or not, you need Raphaël-specific Cufón
files. To do this, go to the [Cufón generator page][] and set it up like
normal, but near the very bottom, look for the section titled
"Customization (for 3rd party scripts only)". See the two icons to the
right of the text input? The first one is for Cufón; the second is for
Raphaël. Click the second icon, and the text in the input box should
change to "Raphael.registerfont()". Generate the font file and save it
with your other JavaScript files. I like to prefix Raphaël font files
with "Raphael-" to keep them separate from my standard Cufón files. Make
sure that your site is actually loading these new font files with
<script\> tags. Next up, set up your Raphaël canvas. When you want to
place text on the canvas, use .print() instead of .text() (check the
Raphaël [documentation page][] for syntax). You can use the same .attr()
function to set attributes like fill, stroke, font-size, and more. There
is one attribute that you will definitely want to use, and which the
Raphaël documentation does not discuss - text-anchor. Set text-anchor to
"start" to make your text left-aligned, since the default is centered.
You can also set text-anchor to "end" to get right-aligned text. Keep in
mind that your custom text from .print() is not a single string - it's a
"set" of paths, one for each letter. That means that setting "x" or "y"
through .attr() isn't going to do anything, because .attr() on a set
applies the attribute to every element of the set - the set itself
doesn't have "x" or "y". Instead, use .translate() or
.animate({translation: "dx,dy"}) if you want to animate the movement. If
you want to rotate text, you must include coordinates around which the
text will be rotated. The rotation attribute (or the .rotate() function)
assume that each object will be rotated about its center point. That's
why you get the spinning letters effect when you call .rotate() on Cufón
text - each path is rotating around its own center. That's also why my
prototype with .text() lost left-alignment after rotation - it was
rotating from the center of the text string. Specifying a rotation point
moves each item being rotated the specified number of degrees around an
imaginary circle, with the rotation point as its center and the distance
between that point and the rotating item as the circle's radius. So how
do you figure out what to use as the point of rotation? Thankfully, with
text, it's pretty simple - just use whatever you specified as the
position for the .text() or .print() function. In my case, the text was
positioned at 20,180, so I used that as the rotation point in my
.rotate() call. When I translated the text to 60,20 on slide hover, I
used those new coordinates as the rotation point to make the text
vertical again before translating it back to 20,180.

### Fun with Raphaël

Making the horizontal accordion took a lot of trial and error, but now
that I understand what's going on behind the scenes it wasn't all that
complicated. I'm looking forward to creating some animated graphs and
charts with Raphaël, and I'll be sure to post any other insights I
happen upon here.

  [Here]: http://www.oxylusflash.com/files/1540/index.html
  [Raphaël]: http://www.raphaeljs.com
  [Cufón generator page]: http://cufon.shoqolate.com
  [documentation page]: http://raphaeljs.com/reference.html
