Date: Fri, 13 Nov 2009 22:45:58 +0000
Categories: misc
Tags: browser grading,browsers,design,yahoo
Categories: articles
dsq_thread_id: 421962320
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/controlling-your-design-on-the-web-part-1-browser-grading/
Summary: Focus your A-game where it counts.

# Controlling Your Design on the Web, Part 1: Browser Grading

Designers generally like to have control over all aspects of a design -
colors, layout, imagery, fonts, the list goes on and on. Part of what
makes designing for the Web so frustrating, then, is that there is so
little that the designer can directly control. There are an endless
combination of browsers, browser versions, and operating systems that
run those browsers, and as a result it is impossible to predict what a
user will actually see when they visit your site. What looks perfect on
Safari 4 on a Mac may look like garbage on Internet Explorer 7 on a
Windows machine, and it may have an entirely separate set of display
quirks on Firefox 3 on Linux (or on the iPhone's built-in WebKit
browser). How do designers deal with all of this uncertainty without
flipping out and killing everyone around them? The answer is a set of
three related ideas: browser grading, progressive enhancement, and
graceful degradation. Taken together, these three ideas help designers
come to terms with their utter impotence in the face of the Web, and
create sites that look beautiful on any device that views them, even
screen readers.

### Start with Semantic HTML

Before we get started, it's important to point out that all of these
techniques ultimately come back to **using semantic HTML**. If the
browser can't make any sense of what your content actually means, your
job as a designer is going to become much, much harder. If you're not
sure what I'm talking about, be sure to check out [my earlier article][]
on the topic.

### The Old Browser Problem

If there's one tenet of the Web that will always remain true, it's that
**old browsers take a long time to die**. Microsoft, Mozilla, and Apple
come out with new browsers at least once a year, each better than the
last, each encouraging users of the existing version of their browser to
upgrade. Yet, generally speaking, people tend to upgrade their browser
only when they buy a new computer - because it comes with a new browser
pre-installed. Witness, for example, Internet Explorer 6. IE6 was a bold
new advance when it came out with Windows XP. Microsoft had won the
"browser war" with Netscape, and for the first time since the start of
the browser wars, sites could be built that more or less worked the same
everywhere. Then, as designers started adopting CSS to do all of a
site's presentation (as opposed to the older, table-based approach),
IE6's flaws started to appear. IE6 had inherited a bunch of strange
behaviors from IE5.5 before it, and designers got upset. Firefox
appeared from nowhere and started gaining market share; Apple started
making the Safari browser to replace IE for Mac; Google developed Chrome
off of the same WebKit codebase; there was massive growth everywhere in
the browser landscape. Microsoft realized that it was losing the Web it
had worked so hard to lock down, and so it created IE7, and made IE7 a
"High Priority" Windows update - meaning that users who were receiving
automatic updates would get the new version automatically. The following
year, Microsoft produced IE8, with even more improvements, and again it
was to be made a "High Priority" update. Now that IE8 has been released,
and IE7 has been around for over a year, one would expect that no one
would still use IE6. But you would be wrong. IE6 is still used by about
40% of Internet users, and it's still the most popular browser in the
world. IE6 will only truly die when developers and designers around the
world decide to piss off those 40% of users and stop making sites that
work in it. Why? Because users don't like to upgrade their software,
because Microsoft (and other companies as well) has too often released
software updates that break more than they fix. So users turn off
automatic updates, and stop updating at all for good measure. No updates
means no new browsers, which means more headaches for designers.

### Browser Grading

Enter **browser grading**. The folks at Yahoo had the smart idea that
old browsers would be around forever, and you couldn't really expect to
support every browser ever made going forward. There would have to be a
cutoff point where Yahoo could say "So sorry" to a user with an ancient
browser, but that line in the sand would have to be drawn very carefully
so as not to drive away potential customers just because of their
browser. So they [made a list][] of what they considered "A-grade"
browsers, which they would do everything in their power to support,
along with a "C-grade" browser list that should expressly be given the
most toned-down, simple version of the site possible. Every other
browser is treated as "sink-or-swim" - the browser will be given the
"A-grade" version of the site, but if it doesn't look right, that's the
browser's fault, not Yahoo's. As long as your site works in all of the
A-grade browsers, you as a designer don't need to worry about testing
your site on every combination of browser and hardware in the world.
Obviously, as new operating systems and new browser versions come out,
Yahoo revisits their browser gradings to keep everything up-to-date.
Some designers, upon hearing about graded browser support, think about
the "C-grade" category and say "This sounds like more work - I have to
make two versions of every page now?" The answer is no, and the reason
why is semantic HTML. Just serve your HTML page with no CSS or
JavaScript to the C-grade browsers. If your site has been properly
written with progressive enhancement and graceful degradation, the
C-grade browsers will be able to use your site just fine. It won't look
pretty, and it won't have any of the behavior that JavaScript provides,
but it will be functional enough to use. (HTML5 may throw a bit of a
wrench into this idea, but we've all got at least ten years before it
becomes a final standard.) Semantic HTML, and the concepts of
progressive enhancement and graceful degradation, demand an entirely
different way of looking at how sites are built. Again, please be sure
to read my earlier article for an introduction to semantic HTML and its
benefits. Because PE and GD are such a large topic, I'm going to close
here for today. Just remember that no matter how many browsers are
created, or how many devices your sites are viewed on, it's OK to make
your own dividing line of which browsers you will fully support and
which browsers will get the "My Site for Dummies" experience. As long as
you're not cutting off users of older browser entirely, the experience
of the "A-grade" site might just persuade your users to upgrade to a
browser that didn't come out when the Hamster Dance page was popular.

  [my earlier article]: http://arborwebsolutions.com/blog/2009/11/semantic-html-from-the-ground-up/
  [made a list]: http://developer.yahoo.com/yui/articles/gbs/
