Date: Sun, 15 Nov 2009 14:36:11 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: browser grading,design,graceful degradation,progressive enhancement
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/controlling-your-design-on-the-web-part-2-progressive-enhancement-and-graceful-degradation/
Summary: Make something that works in every browser, even if it's not as pretty.

# Controlling Your Design on the Web, Part 2: Progressive Enhancement and Graceful Degradation

To continue yesterday's talk about [graded browser support][], let's
take a look at the techniques that make the "A-grade" / "C-grade"
distinction possible: **progressive enhancement (PE)** and **graceful
degradation (GD)**. These two work at the same problem - the fact that
different browsers and devices have different levels of support for web
technologies - from different ends. GD is the belief that A-grade
designs should "roll back" gracefully to work at a basic level in
C-grade browsers; PE advocates believe that the C-grade version of the
site should be the full experience, with additions made that improve the
A-grade experience only when they do not damage the presentation in
C-grade browsers.

### Graceful degradation

So, GD first. GD basically says that every browser should be able to get
some basic level of functionality out of your site. A-grade browsers
like recent versions of Firefox or Safari will get all the flashy bits
and fine details that CSS3 and JavaScript can provide, but without those
elements, the site will at least work in some general sense. Take, for
example, inline event handlers in JavaScript. An inline event handler
lets you add something like this to your HTML code:

    <a href="#" onclick="popUp(http://example.com); return false;">Click Me!</a>

This way, when you click the link, you open example.com in a pop-up
window without changing the page in the current window. However, for
someone who has JavaScript disabled, the example.com link is completely
inaccessible; clicking the link will re-load the current page. This is
the opposite of graceful degradation. Compare the previous link with
this one:

    <a href="http://example.com" onclick="popUp(this.href); return false;">Click Me!</a>

Now, because there is an actual "href" attribute to follow, browsers
without JavaScript can still follow the link, even if they don't get the
new page in a pop-up window. That's graceful degradation - keeping the
general functionality of the site available to all browsers, even if the
exact effect you wanted won't work. Keep in mind that graceful
degradation also implies that if your site has video or audio, you
should provide transcripts, and that if your entire site is in Flash,
you will need a separate, HTML-only site. GD can even apply to CSS. If
your site makes no sense without CSS (for example, half of the site is
made up of text contained in background images), then it does not
degrade gracefully. You need to start from a firm foundation first,
which brings us to...

### Progressive enhancement

So, you've coded up your brand new site as text-only, semantic HTML, and
you decide it would be really great to add in some fancy animations or
interesting behavior. This is where PE comes into play. At the most
basic level, all styling and behavior should be placed into external
files - .css and .js - to allow the oldest of old browsers to still
render the HTML content of the page. By keeping your JavaScript external
and "unobtrusive," the site's functionality is not dependent on
JavaScript to function, and your JS code merely enhances the site for
capable browsers. The same should go for CSS - every style rule you add
to your stylesheet should be enhancing the design for browsers that
understand it, not adding functions that the site requires to operate.
Some JavaScript-heavy sites cannot be built in a truly "progressive
enhancement" manner - a JavaScript game, for example, probably cannot
function without having JavaScript available in the browser. However,
even in these sorts of cases, some basic principles of progressive
enhancement can be followed. As much of the interface as possible can be
coded as PE, with only the core game elements as JavaScript-only items.

### Recap

Let's take a look at everything one more time. Old browsers stick around
for far longer than anyone would expect, so even when new browsers with
new features come out, we can't code exclusively for those new features
unless that is the only way our site idea could function. As a result,
we need to draw a line between fully-supported browsers and
minimally-supported browsers, the "A-grade" and "C-grade" browsers of
Yahoo's Graded Browser Support table. Once we've made our lists of
browsers, we build a solid core website with semantic HTML that contains
all of our site's content in a method that all browsers can access, in
order to ensure we have a site that degrades gracefully. Then, we begin
progressively enhancing this skeleton site, adding features that benefit
newer browsers without compromising the functionality in the C-grade
browsers.

  [graded browser support]: http://arborwebsolutions.com/blog/2009/11/controlling-your-design-on-the-web-part-1-browser-grading/
