Date: Sat, 06 Mar 2010 15:22:27 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: design,ebooks,typesetting
dsq_thread_id: 421962349
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/03/e-books-as-a-blank-canvas/
Summary: Why we need to find a new canon of book design.

# E-Books as a Blank Canvas

While reading a book yesterday I made an interesting discovery: a
chapter that began on a verso (left-side) page. In a standard typeset
book, chapters or other major divisions generally begin on a recto
(right-side) page, leaving a blank verso if the previous section ended
on a recto page. This book followed that standard everywhere else, so I
wondered if this was an accidental oversight on the part of the
typesetter or if it was a deliberate act that met some other, unknown
publishing requirement. I thought to myself that in an e-book, these
distinctions are entirely meaningless. E-book hardware only shows one
page at a time. Even the notion of "pages" is abstracted away, as the
user re-sizes text on the fly and the entire book re-flows its own
layout to match, adding or dropping page numbers as needed.

So are
typesetters out of a job? Hardly. A professionally typeset book exudes
quality, even if the writing within does not. Until everyone starts
writing their books in a system like LaTeX, typesetters will play an
important role in adding value to a finished book, online or not. Even
with publishing systems like LaTeX, a good typesetter can still make a
book stand out in a way that matches the tone and style of its writing.
As with anything else in design, the rules exist so that those who have
mastered the rules can break them creatively. I propose that the e-book
can serve as a blank canvas on which an entirely new art of typesetting
can flourish. What we have currently is a system that creates beautiful
printed books and then translates them into e-books in imitation of the
original. Where we need to end up is a system for creating beautiful
e-books from the beginning, with their own standards and conventions. 

As
e-books become more popular, I think we will see a revolution in how we
conceive of the "book" as an object. For reference, one need only look
to the constant evolutions of the video game industry. Whenever a new
console cycle begins, developers' first impulse is to create games that
are very similar to what has already been done, only "better". As the
hardware matures and developers become more confident in working with
it, entirely new types of games are created that utilize the best
features of the new hardware while casting aside gameplay mechanics and
practices that no longer make sense. The end result is a set of games
that are unique to that generation of consoles and represent the best of
an era. Printed books have had a long run, but a new cycle is beginning,
and I'm eagerly waiting for the end results.
