Date: Sun, 13 Sep 2009 13:50:07 +0000
Tags: consistency,designers,finding good designers,hiring,web design
Categories: articles
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/09/finding-good-designers-part-1-consistency/
Summary: What to look for when you need a designer.

# Finding Good Designers, Part 1: Consistency

Recently, an organization that I volunteered with asked "How can we find
a knowledgeable web designer in the future if you're not available to
help us?" Web design and development don't have any prominent
certification paths or even a defined educational path; anyone with a
computer and a basic understanding of HTML can call themselves a web
designer. So, to help those looking to hire a web designer assess their
prospective hire's abilities, I'm beginning this series of posts that
will show you simple techniques for spotting competent web design. 

First
off, any web designer worth his/her salt should **have their own
website**. A designer who doesn't have a website is like an auto
mechanic who doesn't own a car - it's not impossible that they have true
skill, but would you really trust someone who doesn't use the very
services they sell? 

Found a designer with a nice-looking website? Great!
Now the real fun can begin. The first and most basic thing to look for
in a designer's work is **consistency**. While it's easy for anyone to
slap together a few pages in Adobe Dreamweaver or even Microsoft
Frontpage (ughhh....) and put them up for all the world to see, real
designers have an eye for detail. Consistency is the most obvious sign
of attention to detail. So, what things in a site should be consistent?

-   **Page titles.** Does the designer have a **system for naming
    pages**? (For those who don't know what I'm referring to: the page
    title is the text that appears at the very top of your browser
    window, by the minimize / close / etc. buttons.) Be wary of a
    designer whose page titles are non-existent ("Untitled Page" or
    similar), all the same, or don't follow any real system - e.g., one
    page is titled "Awesome Site | About Us" and another page is titled
    "Contact Us \> Awesome Site". It shows a lack of attention to detail
    and a "good enough" attitude toward their work.
-   **Layout and positioning.** Do the elements on each page maintain a
    consistent layout from page to page? I don't mean that the site has
    to use an identical layout on every page of the site; it's quite
    common for a "home" page to have a very different layout from an
    "interior" page. But for pages which are obviously intended to have
    the same layout, do the elements **actually show up in the same
    place**? A poorly-coded site may have a top banner which is flush
    against the browser toolbar on one page, but which has a 20-pixel
    gap on another page. These are signs that either the designer
    doesn't understand their CSS code, or that they did not take the
    time to "proofread" their site before making it live.
-   **Color.** As with layout and positioning, I don't mean to imply
    that a site can't use different colors among its various pages.
    However, if you notice that one page of a site has a green
    background, and that another page of the site has a similar, but
    noticeably different, shade of green, it's likely an oversight on
    the part of the designer and not an artistic effect. Be on the
    lookout for **variations in color** as you move from page to page.

There are a number of other things that can be analyzed - for example,
consistency in internal link targets - but the three items above are
good enough to serve as a general litmus test. That's it for today, but
I'll be expanding on this series over the coming weeks. Have you had any
experiences (good or bad) with hiring a web designer? Leave a comment on
this post to help others looking for designers.
