Date: Wed, 11 Nov 2009 22:38:19 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: design,libraries
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/helping-your-users/
Summary: Making customer service a priority.

# Helping Your Users

Today is Veterans' Day in the US, and as a result many government
offices are closed. This includes the [Miami-Dade Public Library
System][] (MDPLS). All 47 library branches in the Miami area were closed
today. Nonetheless, a line of people formed in front of the South Miami
branch this afternoon at 12:30, the normal opening time of that branch.

I know this because I was there with them, waiting for the library to
open. You may be asking yourself "wait... if you knew it was Veterans'
Day, why did you go to the library?" Well, quite simply I forgot. The
only reason I knew it was Veterans' Day was because of Google's special
logo drawing (even then, I had to hover over the graphic to find out
what it was for). Plus, Veterans' Day is not a holiday on the order of
Thanksgiving or even Labor Day; for 99% of businesses, it's just another
day, or at most an excuse to hold a sale. I forgot that the library
might be closed, and so did everyone else waiting in front of the
building this afternoon.

### How the library could have helped

Public libraries face a crisis in the modern era; fewer and fewer adults
in the US read books, and research that might have required a library's
collected knowledge in the past can now usually happen on the Internet,
without even saying "hello" to a librarian. Smart libraries are doing
everything in their power to be convenient and helpful for their users -
lending music and DVD's in addition to books, teaching classes, and
offering activities for children. 

Many libraries, however, still treat
the Web as a second-class citizen. MDPLS could have avoided that line of
people if it had just put a simple notice on its home page that all
library branches would be closed today. I actually went to the library's
website this morning to see if items I had requested were available for
pick-up, and I never once saw a notice that the library was closed.
(They also could have avoided the line by taping a sign to the front
door with the same information, but that's another matter.) 

To be fair,
the MDPLS site did contain the information that the library was closed.
That information was placed, though, in an out-of-the-way corner that no
user would ever reach unless they were specifically searching for what
days the library closed for - exactly the opposite approach that most
users like myself would take. Clicking "Find a library" gave me a list
of all branches, and I clicked the branch closest to me and clicked
"Hours." I found that the library opened at 12:30 on Wednesdays, and
failed to see the note saying "Closed Sunday and holidays," in which
"holidays" was a link to a page listing which holidays they would be
closed for. Instead, a note on the home page would have stopped me from
even looking at hours and saved me a lot of time and frustration.

### The general problem

Walking to a library that isn't open is certainly not catastrophic; if
anything it gave me some exercise. But there are many examples of
systems that could help users, but choose not to. When was the last time
you visited a health-related website (doctor, dentist, etc.) where the
office hours listed were actually correct, or where the appointment time
you were given was actually met when you got there? How many times have
you visited a government office to do something simple, like renewing
your driver's license, only to find out that the forms you filled out
from their website are not the right forms? All of us encounter
"afterthought" systems in our daily lives, especially on the web - sites
that were thrown together in an effort to "have an online presence" but
which have been left to rot in the basement. Is this the fault of the
site designer, or of the site owner, or both?

I would argue that the
problem in general is the entire attitude of the web design industry.
Too often, web design is sold as a commodity, an impersonal service that
results in a deliverable of average quality for a set price. We, as
designers, have taught our clients that designers are interchangeable
and that "design" itself is just cranking a lever on some fancy web
design machinery. Clients, in turn, generally want nothing to do with
the process of design, feeling that design is what they hired the
designer for in the first place. The end result is a site that works and
(hopefully) has the designer's best intentions, but which the client has
no connection to and no inclination to maintain. It's like giving
someone a beautiful potted plant, only to have them keep it in the
closet "until they really need it." By the time they want to make
updates, the site is already dead.

Instead, designers need to promote
the idea that design is something a client and designer do **together**.
Clients have to know that they have responsibility for the site just as
much as the designer. Clients need to fully present their message to the
designer - what exactly their company offers, who would be helped by it,
what the company's attitude is like - and the designer has to take all
of that information and craft it into a design that gets that message
across. (The designer can, of course, help the client find the answers
to those questions, but he/she can't just make up the answers out of
whole cloth.) **We, as designers, cannot afford to have clients think
that hiring a designer is the extent of their responsibilities.**The end
results will not be our best work, and the clients will only have us to
blame.

### Back to the library

To return to today's situation, MDPLS most likely built its website for
the same reason that so many companies do - because everyone else has
one. But that seems to be about as far as they are willing to go;
everything beyond having a website that exists and lets people manage
their library card accounts is "not my job." Companies and organizations
with this attitude should know that yes, it most certainly is your job.
And if you are not willing to make it your job, there are plenty of
others who are more than happy to take your place. Granted, I'm sure no
one is itching to replace MDPLS, but even among public libraries there
are [strong examples][] of websites that do more than just exist.

  [Miami-Dade Public Library System]: http://mdpls.org/
  [strong examples]: http://aadl.org "Ann Arbor District Library"
