Date: Sun, 23 May 2010 16:48:27 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: accessibility,libraries,mdpls,misc,section 508
dsq_thread_id: 440660205
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/05/miami-dade-public-library-system-and-accessibility-nightmares/
Summary: A new website that is actually a step back.

# Miami-Dade Public Library System and Accessibility Nightmares [Updated]

_[Update: I received a response from MDPLS earlier this week. The library
system states that the faults I found with their particular system are
endemic to library IT as a whole, and that my comments will be passed on
to the vendor. I am glad that this is being addressed, but I still find
it a bit shocking that the tech-savvy library and information sciences
field does not have better solutions available.]_

Hello, dear readers.
I'd like to start with a message I just sent to the [Miami-Dade Public
Library System][]. MDPLS recently spent months integrating a new
web-based catalog and backend circulation system, and the results are...
well, just read my message:

> For the past few weeks, I have been excited to see your new catalog
> system, but I must admit I am a bit appalled at the results. As the
> Polaris ILS website proudly proclaims, MDPLS is a "world-class
> library," and yet your new website system is third-rate at best. 
>
> 1.
> The catalog site uses a table-based layout. CSS layouts have been
> widely supported in all major browsers for at least six years.
> Table-based layouts use nearly twice as much "code" as CSS layouts to
> achieve the same result, making table-based layouts much more
> difficult for machines (including both Google and screen reader
> software for disabled users) to understand. 
>
> 2. Worse, portions of your
> new site's source code reference "Office 2007". How is the software
> for a world-class library system built using a word processor? Likely
> as a result of this, parts of the website (such as the drop-down menu
> buttons on the lists of bestsellers) do not seem to work properly in
> any browser other than Internet Explorer. Users of Mac OS X computers
> cannot download Internet Explorer and are therefore out of luck. In
> today's internet, it is extremely rare to find websites that only work
> in one browser, and the fact that your new site is tied to Internet
> Explorer is troubling. 
>
> 3. The catalog is almost entirely unusable for
> disabled users! Most links on the page are images without ALT text,
> and the page includes large amounts of inline JavaScript, which are
> not only non-compliant with web standards but also unusable by screen
> reader software. Some areas of your site are only accessible by users
> who can visually see where the mouse pointer is on the screen. Even on
> a more subtle level, the "tab" headings of the catalog system use dark
> blue text against a slightly lighter blue background, a lack of color
> contrast which makes reading difficult for users without perfect
> vision. The overall lack of accessibility is blatant and in violation
> of Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Section 508 has lead
> to large judgements against corporations who disregard accessibility;
> see e.g. the $6 million dollar settlement in National Federation of
> the Blind v. Target Corporation in 2006. I am amazed that a large
> municipal entity like MDPLS apparently did not even attempt to verify
> the usability of their website for disabled patrons. How much did this
> new software installation, which is decidedly behind the times, cost?
> 
>
> Many other library systems around the country have created stellar
> examples of usable, accessible, and fully-integrated websites. I
> realize that they are a much smaller system, but I urge you to
> evaluate the Ann Arbor, MI library website at http://www.aadl.org - a
> site created entirely with the open-source (and therefore
> free-of-cost) Drupal software, which also runs major corporate and
> organizational websites around the world. Drupal is obviously not the
> only way to create a highly functional and usable website, but AADL
> serves as a strong example of what library websites can do. As a
> regular MDPLS patron, I am deeply disappointed with the new catalog
> system, and I look forward to your response to these problems.

MDPLS is the largest library system I have ever had the pleasure of
using. They have an incredibly large collection and I haven't had many
problems with their services. However, their website has always been
sub-par, and my hopes for improvement with their new system have been
dashed. I hope that someone at MDPLS reads my message, and I urge you,
dear readers, to write to them yourselves through their [contact
form][].

  [Miami-Dade Public Library System]: http://mdpls.org
  [contact form]: http://www.mdpls.org/catalog/contactForm.asp
