Date: Fri, 04 Sep 2009 00:58:41 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: ann arbor,blogs,misc,newspapers,wikis
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/09/news-wikis-ann-arbor-style/
Summary: Bold new moves in the world of newspapers.

# News Wikis, Ann Arbor style

A few days ago I came upon [newsless.org][], which states that it's
"Time to stop breaking the news, and start fixing it." In its [inaugural
post][], Matt Thompson presents the following:

> Five years ago, blogger Dave Winer and New York Times executive Martin
> Nisenholtz [made a bet][]. “In a Google search of five keywords or
> phrases representing the top five news stories of 2007,” Winer
> wagered, “weblogs will rank higher than the New York Times Web site.”
> When it came time to judge the bet, blogs outranked the Times on four
> out of the five chosen stories, making Winer the winner. But the real
> news out of the bet was the site that trounced them both — Wikipedia.

Yes, that's right. As anyone who's searched for a hot news item on
Google can attest, Wikipedia knows all, and it is consistently at or
near the top for nearly any topic in the news. But Matt doesn't claim
that newspapers should be replaced by Wikipedia. He argues that the path
to salvation for the troubled newspaper industry is in hyper-local
wikis:

> Imagine if the work of the hundreds of reporters dispatched daily to
> cover a city didn’t merely fade into an obscure archive, but added day
> after day to the work that came before it. An online news site in the
> era of Wikipedia would be a living archive, adaptable to suit any
> context, growing to encompass all aspects of life in a community.

Those words were written in February 2008, but they are actually coming
to fruition in some places. The [Ann Arbor News][] has transitioned away
from being a daily print publication to twice-weekly, and re-focused
itself as being "of, by and for the community." Anyone can register for
an account at annarbor.com and begin posting commentary. 

This is how
newspapers can once again become relevant - by acting as the
centralized, local place for members of the community to interact and
feel welcome. It's the same formula that made Craigslist such a popular
site - and that killed newspaper classifieds in the process.

Granted,
AnnArbor.com is not really a wiki at all yet. It's more of a blog at
this point, but that's still a step in the right direction. If the
community embraces this concept, then the staff of AnnArbor.com may one
day become the framework upon which community interaction happens,
nothing more than a catalyst for wider discussion - which, to me, is
exactly what a newspaper should be.

  [newsless.org]: http://newsless.org "Newsless"
  [inaugural post]: http://www.newsless.org/2008/09/my-research-proposal/
    ""My Research Proposal""
  [made a bet]: http://blog.longnow.org/2008/02/01/decision-blogs-vs-new-york-times/
  [Ann Arbor News]: http://annarbor.com
