Date: Sun, 29 Nov 2009 22:45:37 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: d&amp;d,dos,games,thanksgiving
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/old-fascinations-and-new-sensations/
Summary: How to make DOS and Dungeons and Dragons relevant to your web work.

# Old Fascinations and New Sensations

Like many Americans, I spent last week visiting my family for
Thanksgiving. Since moving to Miami put me within driving distance of my
parents for the first time since their move many years ago, I brought
back with me a few boxes of books and knick-knacks I had accumulated
during high school. The boxes work as a sort of time capsule -
archaeological relics of a bygone era that inspire equal measures of awe
and head-scratching.

Dungeons & Dragons might have given me a stockpile
of fond memories and a solid grasp of world mythology, but at the same
time the books represent a pretty significant outlay of money for what
amounts to a work of fiction. Essentially, there are two ways of looking
at the boxes. One way is to look at the assembled whole and say "what
was I thinking?"and throw the entire lot of it into some kind of mental
(and physical) garbage can - "out with the old, in with the new." The
other way is to embrace that history, to recognize what about it made it
so special and to take that forward into new experiences in the future.


In thinking about all of this stuff and what it actually means to me, I
think my personal reaction is to take a middle path. I installed that
big box of DOS games using [Boxer][] on my Mac, and as I play through
them here and there, I study them - what was it that made me enjoy them
so much, and what parts of them should have been done differently? What
were the truly timeless games, and what games should be forgotten? 

The
same applies to nearly everything we come across in our daily lives. We
can endlessly analyze the things around us in terms of what does and
does not make them "work" in a functional or aesthetic sense. The trick
is to always be questioning, and to always look for influences that can
be put to use in future work. 

*For the record, definite classics
include* TIE Fighter, X-COM: UFO Defense, Syndicate*, and
SSI's* Stronghold*; weak games include* Magic Carpet *(though it was
certainly revolutionary for its time) and* Cyberia *(with a "C"), even
though it did have a pretty good soundtrack by Thomas Dolby.* What about
you, reader? Anything interesting influencing your work lately? Any
recollections of DOS games or AD&D that you'd like to share? Leave a
comment below and tell us about it. *P.S. - The title of this post comes
from the song "Fascination" by La Roux. Another way, besides DOS and
D&D, that the 80's are coming back into my life.*

  [Boxer]: http://boxerapp.com/
