Date: Thu, 05 Nov 2009 20:51:49 +0000
Tags: adsense,advertising,adwords,beginners,google
Categories: articles
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/online-advertising-an-overview/
Summary: How to place (and display) ads with Google.

# Online Advertising: An Overview

I don't profess to be an expert at online advertising; I've had very
little direct experience. But I often have clients ask about putting ads
on their site to make money, or how to buy advertising online. With that
in mind, I'm going to offer a brief look at how Google's AdWords /
AdSense programs work, and how to get started with them.

### AdWords vs. AdSense

First off, some definitions. **AdWords** is Google's program for
advertisers. If you want to buy advertising, you'll want AdWords.
**AdSense**, meanwhile, is a program for site owners who want to run
*other people's*ads on their own site. In exchange for hosting the ads
on your site, you get some income from Google. Generally you'll want to
use one or the other; it doesn't make much sense to pay to put your ads
on the web, while hosting advertising for your competitors at the same
time.

### How AdWords Works

AdWords lets you pay to place text, image, or video ads on "contextually
relevant" websites and in Google's search results. "Contextually
relevant" means that if your ad is for a new TV, you might show up in
searches for HBO, but not at BookNook.com. How does Google decide what
"contextually relevant" actually means? 

That's all up to you.
When you purchase your ads, you define the "title" of the ad (the actual
clickable link), the short text message that appears below the title,
and what keywords you want to associate your ad with. You can choose
broad keywords (where "tennis shoes" would match "tennis", "shoes",
"shoes for tennis", etc.), phrase keywords (where "tennis shoes" would
only match search terms with exactly "tennis shoes" in them), exact
keywords (where "tennis shoes" matches only "tennis shoes" and nothing
else), and negative keywords (where "tennis shoes -used" would
explicitly not match a search for "used tennis shoes"). It's a lot of
options, and they allow you to tailor your ad campaign to be as broad or
narrow as you like. The more specific your ad campaign, the more likely
it is to appear with searches of that type, regardless of how much you
spend on advertising. 

Unlike running an ad in a newspaper, you don't pay
for your ad campaign up front. Instead, you choose how much you're
willing to pay every time someone clicks on your ad. Since there are
only a limited number of "slots" for a given set of search results or on
a particular website, the highest bidder with the most relevant content
gets to place their ad. So if you're willing to spend a dollar for every
click, your ad will show up far more often than someone who only bid 10
cents per click (and you will pay accordingly for the extra exposure
when your ad is clicked on more often). At the same time, your
10-cent-per-click exact match ad for "Uncle Jerry's Famous Ice Cream"
will probably beat out a rival's $1 per click broad-match ad for "ice
cream" if someone is searching for those exact words. You can also opt
to pay "per thousand impressions", meaning every 1,000 people who see
your ad (regardless of whether they click on it or not) will cost you a
set amount. This works very similarly to cost-per-click - higher "bids"
will appear more often than lower bids.

### How AdSense Works

If you're a site owner looking to make money from advertising, you'll
want to look into AdSense. After signing up for the program, you get to
pick what kind of advertising you want to host on your site (text,
image, video, etc., along with what size of images you'd like to host),
and Google will give you the code to plug into your website (a small
JavaScript script). After that, you can pretty much sit back and wait;
you'll receive a fraction of the cost-per-click or
cost-per-thousand-impressions cost paid by the advertiser, with
aggregate payments sent to you on a regular basis. 

Since you're only
receiving a tiny amount of an already small cost, you should know that
you're not going to make much money at all unless your site receives at
least hundreds of visitors per day. If you don't know how many people
are coming to your site, you can find out by installing an analytics
system like Google Analytics (more on analytics in a later post). You
can think of analytics programs as the modern, incredibly detailed,
non-embarrassing version of the venerable old "hit counter."

### Is Google It?

No, of course not. There are plenty of other advertising systems. Google
happens to be the 800-pound gorilla of online advertising, though, which
makes them a great place to start. If your ads target a specific niche
of users, you may be able to find an advertising network that caters to
those users; for example, look to networks like [The Deck][] or [Fusion
Ads][] if your product or service targets designers or web developers.
These kinds of niche networks can generally get you more "bang for your
buck" if you are only targeting a narrow audience. To get started with
Google advertising, just visit their homepage at google.com and click
the link for "Advertising Programs" underneath the search box. Any other
ad networks I should be aware of? Any success stories (or total
failures) in online advertising that you'd like to share? Leave a
comment below, and I'll be in touch.

  [The Deck]: http://decknetwork.net/
  [Fusion Ads]: http://fusionads.net/
