Date: Fri, 20 Nov 2009 03:36:07 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: freelance
dsq_thread_id: 426704480
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/perfect-apostrophes-and-freelance-work/
Summary: Spend more time doing, and less time preparing to do.

# Perfect Apostrophes and Freelance Work

When you start working for yourself, it's all too easy to tell yourself
that you're not quite ready to do real work. You endlessly re-work your
personal site and your portfolio, you read everything you can get your
hands on that even mentions your field, and you study endlessly in the
hope of one day being good enough. 

While all of these are important, and
it's always good to have an idea of how much you don't know, it's also
important to have the courage to put the skills you acquire into
practice. Learning and studying can become a shield that we hide behind
instead of doing real work and putting ourselves out there to get real
work.

### Perfect apostrophes

Merlin Mann once shared the story of his sudden book deal with O'Reilly
on an episode of "43 Folders." Merlin decided that he would keep his
final drafts in a binder - which required him to research and buy a
binder, a three-hole punch, paper to put in it, and more. Binder at the
ready, he decided that the binder didn't look real enough without a
cover insert, so he designed his own O'Reilly animal-themed cover to put
into the binder's front cover. 

But something wasn't quite right - the
apostrophe he had used in his "O'Reilly" logo didn't match up with the
one used on real O'Reilly books. After spending half a day looking at
fonts trying to find "the perfect apostrophe," he finally realized that
his belief that he needed the perfect set of tools, perfect knowledge of
what he needed to do, had wasted three entire days - and he only had a
short time in which to write the book. 

The moral of the story is
obvious. Working to improve yourself is a great goal - it leads to
better work and happier clients. But focusing all of your time and
energy on improvement is ultimately a waste, because it doesn't give you
any real experience. You will never know everything there is to know,
because "what you need to know" is always changing, especially in a
fast-paced industry like web design. **Ultimately, you can probably learn
more by taking on client work that is a bit outside your comfort zone
than by sitting around reading all day.** Don't chase the perfect
apostrophe when you could be chasing client work instead.

### My apostrophes

I've been guilty of chasing the perfect apostrophe myself. I've been
doing web design as a "side job" for years, and I've hesitated to make
it my full-time occupation. Even now, I worry that my work isn't good
enough for me to look for new clients, and that I should be improving my
skills even more. Meanwhile, designers with no concept of usability or
architecturally sound coding are cranking out mediocre websites left and
right. Anyone who has researched clients for web design knows the
incredible number of really terrible sites that businesses and
individuals have paid for. To truly practice the principles I hold dear,
I should be making those sites - and making them far better than what
they are now - instead of telling myself I'm not yet good enough. 

How
about you? Are there any perfect apostrophes in your life? How are you
getting around them to do the best work you possibly can? Leave a
comment below!
