Date: Sun, 31 Jan 2010 16:43:51 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: apple,flash,ipad,iphone,ipod
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2010/01/the-apple-ipad-flash-and-the-future-of-computing/
Summary: The iPad is locked down and lacks features - but it will succeed all the same.

# The Apple iPad, Flash, and the Future of Computing

On Wednesday, months of rumor and speculation came to an abrupt end when
Apple chief Steve Jobs formally unveiled his "latest creation," the
Apple iPad. The death of rumor relating to the device ushered in an
entirely new wave of speculation. Is this really the thing that Apple
spent years developing? Will it actually sell? Do we really need a
"third device" between laptops and smartphones? Who came up with the
name? 

Most of the negative assessments of the device fall into one of
two camps. The first camp says that the iPad isn't anywhere near as
innovative as rumor and speculation had indicated, and that the iPad is
really nothing more than "a giant iPod Touch." The second camp says that
the iPad is too locked down to be attractive, since it only runs
applications that Apple has blessed with inclusion in the App Store -
notably excluding any version of Adobe's Flash runtime. I'd like to
address both camps in this post. 

**The iPad doesn't have a camera / wash
my car / cook me breakfast.** First, Apple products rarely live up to
their pre-launch hype, but that doesn't make them any less compelling or
significant over the long haul. Look back to the iPod; when it was first
released, I was happy with my portable MiniDisc player / recorder (which
is still, to me anyways, the true successor of the cassette tape). The
iPod was like any other MP3 player on the market when it was released,
and while the Apple hype machine might not have been in full gear at the
time, there certainly wasn't much to be enthused about at the time. 

But as release followed release, the iPod became a thousand-ton juggernaut
in the portable audio market. Apple refined iTunes until it was the best
music management software available, on any platform, not to mention the
premier online store for buying content. Apple invented the "podcast,"
the sonic equivalent of blogging. The iPod itself became ever more
capacious, and when it reached 40GB in its third generation, even I was
tempted enough to ditch my minidisc collection for a device that could
hold my entire music library (at that time, anyways... it's become much
larger since then). The initial product may have disappointed, but it
quickly grew into something much bigger than even the most outlandish
hype could have predicted. 

The cycle repeated itself with the iPhone.
Remember the Motorola ROKR? 100-song hardware limit, with a clumsy
music-playing interface - an abomination that was quickly forgotten in
Cupertino. Then Steve Jobs announced the iPhone. The hype was incredible
- desktop-like web surfing, innovative new multi-touch screen, a whole
new way of interacting with an iPod. Then the criticism began. Mobile
Safari doesn't have a Flash plugin; the phone is too expensive; there's
no way to write real applications for it; you're stuck in a two-year
contract with AT&T; it's too slow. Within two years, Apple had
introduced the blazing-fast iPhone 3GS at nearly half the cost of the
original iPhone, the App Store had outperformed any analyst's
expectations, and Flash started its decline in popularity. 

I predict a
similar cycle with the iPad. Every "major" concern that would supposedly
keep people from buying an iPad - its lack of a camera, the inability to
make phone calls on 3G-equipped models, or the continuing lack of Flash
support - will become a non-issue within two years. Sure, entirely new
issues will arise during that time; witness the complaints about the App
Store approvals process or the outrage at AT&T's service that
accompanied the growth of the iPhone. But the iPad will in all
likelihood sell like hotcakes within one to two years, even if its
initial launch is underwhelming, simply because Apple doesn't sit around
on their laurels when they release a new product line. Apple tweaks,
prods, and perfects their devices, and if they still don't sell well,
only then does Apple lose interest (see the AppleTV or Mac Mini). 

**The
iPad is a locked-down DRM love-fest.** Sad but true. The only way to get
an application onto a standard-issue iPad will be through the iTunes App
Store, meaning that if you consider the iPad a computer, it's about the
most locked-down computer to be sold in the history of computing. If
Apple doesn't like your app, it will not find its way to an unmodified
iPad, period. The lack of a disc drive or even a USB port further
solidifies that, and the iPad's non-traditional filesystem won't even
let you shoehorn an unauthorized application onto the device. Note that
I haven't even mentioned content yet, the traditional place for talk
about DRM. No, the iPad's DRM limits what can come into the device as
much as (if not more than) what you can copy off of it. No wonder the
Free Software Foundation is up in arms. 

All the same, devices like the
iPad really are the future of computing. It's certainly powerful enough
to run nearly any traditional desktop application, along with relatively
complex games (though it's not any real competition to something like
the Xbox 360 or PlayStation 3). It has the world's easiest application
installation process; click a button, potentially charge your credit
card, and the application is on your device and ready to use. And since
every developer in the world is forced to use *the same* application
installer, you will never see the confused jumble that is Windows (or,
to a lesser extent, even Mac) application installs, with product
activation, serial numbers, and actual installer *programs*. 

The iPad
"just works," in an actually meaningful way, and that's all most people
care about. If the Web conforms more closely to Apple's vision, which,
thankfully for Apple, is also the vision of Google and others, then many
users may not even need a "real" computer to complement their iPad. The
stereotypical computer-literate family member who keeps all the family's
computers in good working order will become a thing of the past, because
the iPad is built so that ***it cannot be broken***. It can crash now
and then, sure, but no one will ever need to "re-install iPhone OS" or
make sure that they have the most recent browser or plugins. 

I make only
one caveat to the above paragraph: Apple, and computer manufacturers in
general, cannot use the iPad approach for everyone. Plenty of people use
computers because they enjoy keeping a well-maintained system, much like
car enthusiasts who truly enjoy fixing up their cars with their own two
hands. And specialists - designers, developers, and researchers - will
always need the unparalleled flexibility of a general-purpose operating
system. **The geeks will be all too happy to recommend the iPad to their
relatives, so long as they can keep the shiny toys for themselves.**

**Yeah, but what about Flash?** Over the years, I've had a love/hate
relationship with Adobe. I first learned web design by using my school's
copy of Dreamweaver; without that experience, I probably wouldn't be
where I am today. At the same time, Dreamweaver keeps designers weak by
holding their hands and creating shoddy look-alikes of well-implemented
sites. The Flash Platform is exciting because of its power and its
near-universal install base. ActionScript 3.0 can do an awful lot, and
the Flash runtime can execute some fairly complicated code (like full 3D
gaming) at a reasonable speed. 

But Flash is, and likely always will be,
proprietary. Adobe makes its income selling the tools that allow
developers to target the one and only Flash runtime. If Adobe opened up
Flash development, you would see multiple Flash runtimes for everything
from supercomputers to toasters, and a proliferation of Flash
development tools as well. This would be incredibly good for Flash
adoption - it would have the opportunity to unseat JavaScript as the
go-to scripting language of the Web - but it would bankrupt Adobe. So
Adobe has to walk a fine line. They have to push for adoption of Flash
wherever possible, promoting it as an essential part of the Web like
HTML or CSS, but at the same time they have to keep Flash protected from
any attempt to open-source it or otherwise reveal its complete inner
workings. It's a strategy that makes Adobe act like it has multiple
personalities, threatening open-source developers reverse-engineering
Flash for being too open, but criticizing Apple's exclusion of Flash
from its mobile devices for being not open enough. 

What will the outcome
be? Ultimately, I don't think potential iPad buyers are going to care
about the lack of Flash. Adobe will either find a way to make Flash
web-accessible while still remaining proprietary, or Flash will wither
and die. You can see the beginnings of the first option in Adobe's CS5
demonstrations, where Flash CS5 was shown compiling Flash apps into
native iPhone OS apps, and Dreamweaver could convert interactive charts
from Flash components to HTML5 components. If Adobe's money-maker is
tools for designers and developers, I think Adobe will be making its
tools as useful and relevant as possible - and I think that means
embracing HTML5 and finding ways to make Flash content work within that
scope. 

**Rant mode off.** The iPad really is a unique device, even if it
*is* nothing more than a giant iPod Touch. When the iPad evolves into a
notebook replacement, the computing landscape will be changed forever,
and I believe that such a change is inevitable. In two years, we will
look back at the iPad announcement and tell ourselves that the whole
time we were asking the wrong questions and focusing on the wrong
things. It really is going to be a game-changer, even if I don't find
myself all that enthused about buying the first generation.
