Date: Tue, 10 Nov 2009 21:29:49 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: adobe air,beginners,tweetdeck,twitter
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/twitter-for-fun-and-profit/
Summary: Making the most of your tweets - and why you should be tweeting!

# Twitter for Fun and Profit

So, Twitter. What exactly is it good for? Nobody knows. No, seriously,
no one really knows what Twitter is good for or how to use it "the right
way," whatever that is. All that anyone can do is tell you why or how
they use Twitter and how it works for them. Nonetheless, there are some
things you can do to get the most out of Twitter. If you're willing to
put in a little time and effort, it can be an entirely new social outlet
for you. Otherwise, Twitter really is just a place for nerds to talk
about where they're going to eat lunch.

### Twitter is one-way

The first big thing to point out is that "conversations" in Twitter are
entirely one-way. You post things. That's it. Other people can choose to
subscribe to your "tweets" if they like, but there is no way for a
person reading your tweets to respond to them individually. Twitter is
not Facebook, where a status update or wall post can have comments and
act like a self-contained little chat room. On Twitter, a "reply" is no
different from tweeting a standard message, except you mention the
person you want to receive the message in the tweet itself. Which is
available for everyone to see. No, the system is not very "personal,"
but the very nature of Twitter is in some ways its advantage. You can
get people you've never even met to "talk to you" by subscribing to
their tweets, and you can send messages "to" anyone you want without
having to be their friend. The other person may never respond to your
tweets, but you can be sure they'll get them.

### So, huh?

Yes, exactly - Twitter lets you connect to anyone, so long as you know
their Twitter account name, in an impersonal manner. If you only work
with Twitter at that level, you probably won't get much out of it. But
the ease of connecting gives you a platform to build from. Find the
leaders, the movers and shakers, in your field and follow them. It's
quite likely that they won't follow you back, but you'll still get
access to everything they talk about. If you see something that
interests you, go out and learn more about it on your own. Then write
about it in your blog, talk about it in your podcast, or make a video
about it. If they send a "reply" tweet to someone that sounds
interesting, find that person's Twitter page and try to follow back the
conversation, or follow their tweets as well. In this sense, Twitter is
not so much about the connections as about having a constant stream of
information from the cutting edge of your field.

### But what about the connections?

You might not be able to get the big fish to follow you back, but you
can still have meaningful connections through Twitter. This is where
Twitter Search comes into play. Search for terms from your industry, and
send replies to comments where you think you can help. Being nice will
generally start a lot of conversations and get you new followers. Just
make sure that you are helpful in addition to being nice. Answer
people's questions, or give them advice if you know a better way of
doing something. Over time, you'll find yourself having actual
conversations with people on Twitter. Once you've built up some
followers, you can get some helpful advice from others as well. Twitter
can give you answers in minutes, from actual people - much more than
Google can claim to offer.

### Tools of the trade

There are a huge number of desktop and mobile clients for Twitter, each
with their own particular features. After trying out several of them,
I've decided to use TweetDeck. TweetDeck's advantage compared to other
Twitter clients is the ability to get live feeds of Twitter searches
next to your "friends" feed. If you're spending a decent amount of time
searching for conversations in your field and replying to people,
TweetDeck can save you huge amounts of effort. Plus, it's built on Adobe
AIR, meaning it runs on pretty much anything that has a Flash Player
implementation. Have you been using Twitter regularly? Have you managed
to figure out what Twitter is really for? Leave a comment and let us
know!
