Date: Sun, 08 Nov 2009 02:15:40 +0000
Tags: beginners,django,ftp,hosting,html,java,python,ruby,ruby on rails,sftp,ssh,webfaction
Categories: articles
dsq_thread_id: 421962308
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/web-hosting-demystified-part-2/
Summary: What you need to know about your hosting company's "extras".

# Web Hosting Demystified, Part 2

Yesterday, we looked at [types of hosting and the basics of hosting
plans][]. Today, we finish off our look at web hosting with a discussion
of hosting plan features. Hopefully this two-part series will give you
all the information you need to pick the hosting company that's right
for you.

### Technology Support

Different hosting companies offer different levels of support for Web
technologies. At the most basic level, you can find hosting companies
that only offer support for HTML, CSS, and perhaps PHP, but no access to
databases; these sorts of plans are generally not worth it unless you
know for a fact that you will only ever use static HTML pages. The next
step up will include a limited number of databases. Having a database
allows you to use a wide range of applications, like WordPress, Joomla!,
Drupal, or hundreds of others. I strongly recommend that anyone looking
to host a website start at this level; the freedom to use all of these
pre-made software packages is worth the extra dollar per month you might
pay. 

Continuing to move up the ladder of technology support, you'll find
hosting companies who offer support for Python or Ruby. Having these
languages available on the server will allow you or your designer /
developer to use MVC ("Model-View-Controller") frameworks like Django or
Ruby on Rails. Most personal or even business sites will not need this
level of functionality, but if you need a highly customized website,
these frameworks can help a developer quickly create a secure,
highly-functional web application.

Finally, high-end hosting packages
will offer support for Java web applications (not Java applets, or
JavaScript; full-blown Java applications that need fairly powerful
servers) or multiple, clustered Ruby on Rails servers. These kinds of
plans can be very expensive, but they are really geared toward high-end
projects that can justify the cost - i.e., if you need this kind of
power, you'll know.

### Networking support

You'll also find a variety of levels of networking support among hosting
companies. Every hosting company should provide at least FTP access to
your site's files, but many hosting companies will also offer SSH
(Secure Shell) access as well. SSH allows you to "log in" to the server
and interact with the server operating system, whereas FTP only lets you
upload or download files from the server. Using SSH, you can perform
more complicated operations, edit files directly on the server, and
generally have more freedom to maintain your site's code. Additionally,
having SSH access allows you to connect via SFTP, which works exactly
like regular FTP but provides the added security of encrypting your
login information through SSH.

Some hosting companies do not provide
either FTP or SSH access, but instead provide an "online control panel"
that you can use in your web browser to upload and download site files.
These setups should be avoided at all costs - accessing your files
through a control panel only is painfully slow, and the lack of bulk
upload in most of these solutions makes uploading anything larger than a
tiny brochure site an exercise in futility. Control panels as a whole
are not the problem - many control panel systems make common tasks very
simple - but you want to make sure that you at least have FTP access to
your site.

### User support

Lastly, you'll want to make sure that your hosting company of choice
provides adequate user support to its customers. Search for reviews of
your chosen hosting company to get a sense of this, but take reviews
with a grain of salt; generally only the angriest customers take the
time to leave reviews. Take a look at what options the company offers
for contacting them with problems. A site that only offers an email
address will likely not be as helpful as a company that offers email,
live chat, and forums where users can help one another.

### Can you recommend any hosting companies?

I encourage you to shop around on your own and - better yet - ask
friends or colleagues for their personal experiences with different
hosting companies. You might be able to find a local hosting company
that offers the services you need cheaper than a national or global
hosting provider, with the added benefit of being physically near you in
case you need help or have a problem with your account.

That said, I
personally have been using [WebFaction][] for years. They offer
relatively inexpensive shared hosting that still offers support for
Python, Ruby on Rails, Java, and anything else you might care to
install. Their support is top-notch, often responding to requests in
less than an hour, and I've only experienced one outage of their
service, which lasted for about two hours. Their control panel system is
quite different from that of other hosting companies, so there is a bit
of a learning curve, but I've found their service to be well worth it.

If you're currently running a website, what hosting company do you use?
I'm always interested to hear other people's stories about good (and
not-so-good) hosting companies. Leave a comment below and let me know
your experiences.

  [types of hosting and the basics of hosting plans]: http://arborwebsolutions.com/blog/2009/11/web-hosting-demystified-part-1/
  [WebFaction]: http://www.webfaction.com/
