Date: Fri, 06 Nov 2009 19:53:36 +0000
Tags: beginners,hosting
Categories: articles
dsq_thread_id: 457163578
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/web-hosting-demystified-part-1/
Summary: The basics of hosting companies and hosting plans.

# Web Hosting Demystified, Part 1

As I mentioned in a [previous post][], you need to have a server
somewhere to "host" your site's HTML, CSS, and other files. While some
people choose to host sites on their own, the majority of websites are
hosted by "hosting companies" that specialize in running web servers for
a monthly fee. There are thousands of web hosting companies to choose
from, each offering a range of prices, options, and features. How is
anyone supposed to choose between all these hosting companies and all of
the hosting plans offered?

### Shared or dedicated?

The first decision to make with regards to hosting is how much
"horsepower" your site is going to need. Most hosting companies will
offer two sets of plans - "shared" hosting and "dedicated" or "VPS"
hosting. Let's look at what those terms actually mean. In a "shared"
hosting plan, your web site is one of many being run on the same server.
The web server software on that machine listens for requests for all of
the sites it holds. This means that if your "neighbors" are popular
sites that get large numbers of requests, requests for your site might
be delayed while the server processes the other requests. The upside of
shared hosting is that it doesn't require much work or equipment on the
part of the hosting company, which makes these plans quite inexpensive.
The multiple users of a server computer end up pooling the associated
maintenance costs of the hardware, bringing the cost down for everyone.
"Dedicated" hosting means that you get an entire server to yourself. In
most dedicated plans, that also means that you have full control over
the software being used on the server computer, allowing you to decide
exactly what server software will be used and how it will be configured.
Dedicated hosting is expensive because you don't have anyone else to
share support costs with, so it is only recommended for sites that will
need the power to justify that cost. At the extreme end of dedicated
hosting is the "co-location" or "colo" plan, where you ship the hosting
company your actual, physical computer and they hook it up to their
network infrastructure and look after it like their own. Finally, "VPS"
hosting (for "Virtual Private Server") is a hybrid of the shared and
dedicated hosting models. Instead of a single computer hosting a hundred
or so sites as in a shared hosting environment, a single server computer
hosts a small number of "virtual private servers." Each VPS is an entire
computer being run as software; the physical server computer pretends to
be 5-10 separate computers. Like a dedicated plan, this gives you full
control over what software the VPS is running. However, like a shared
plan, you don't get the full resources of the hardware because you're
sharing it with other people. Since VPS is a hybrid of shared and
dedicated models, the pricing is somewhere between shared and dedicated
plan costs.

### OK, which do I choose?

Take a look at your website and decide how much power it's actually
going to need. If you are running a personal site or a business
"brochure" site, shared hosting should generally more than meet your
needs. If you are running a web application like an e-commerce store,
you might want to look into VPS options if you are getting a large
volume of sales per day; otherwise, shared hosting can probably still
accommodate your needs. Dedicated hosting should be reserved for
extremely popular or resource-hungry sites, like Perez Hilton's
millions-of-readers blog or a Java application that is used by every
employee of a moderate-sized company. When in doubt, start with shared
hosting. Most hosting companies will allow you to "upgrade" from a
shared plan to something more expensive just by paying the difference
between the two plans.

### Hosting Plans

Now that you've selected a broad category of plans, it's time to find
the exact plan that's right for your site. Generally the differences in
plans relate to how much disk space and bandwidth you have access too;
some hosting companies will also give you varying amounts of email
address hosting or server memory. Disk space is a measure of how much
space you can use on the server computer's hard drive. For a small site,
50 MB (megabytes) will likely be more than enough. If you're running a
photo gallery website or an e-commerce site, you will need much more to
hold all of the images and the customer / user database. Storage prices
have been in free fall for the last year or two, so most hosting
providers should be offering you at least 500MB of storage in their
least expensive plan. Beware of plans which make statements like "up to
500MB" of storage space. This generally means that the hosting company
is overselling their servers - expecting that most sites won't use
anywhere near their allotted space - and you might not be able to make
use of the full amount of space you were quoted. Check also for the
company's fees for disk space in excess of what you are quoted in the
plan. Bandwidth determines how much data you can send "over the wire"
per month. Every time a visitor comes to your site, the server must send
that user all of the files (HTML, CSS, etc.) that make up your site. If
your site's files take up 10MB on the server, then a user who visits
every page of your site uses up 10MB of your hosting plan's monthly
bandwidth. Like disk space, bandwidth has become cheaper and cheaper in
recent years. Look for a minimum of 5 GB (gigabytes; 1 GB = 1,000 MB) of
monthly bandwidth, and be sure to find out what the hosting company
charges should your site exceed its monthly bandwidth.

### More to Come

Today, we looked at types of hosting and the basics of hosting plans.
Tomorrow, we'll continue looking at hosting plans and the extra features
that help separate one hosting company from another. Thanks for reading,
and I'll see you back here tomorrow!

  [previous post]: http://arborwebsolutions.com/blog/2009/11/web-design-and-development-the-mile-high-view/
    "Web Design and Development: The Mile-High View"
