Date: Wed, 04 Nov 2009 19:37:20 +0000
Categories: articles
Tags: beginners,cgi,css,databases,django,dns,dreamweaver,html,php,ruby on rails,web design,web development
dsq_thread_id: 421962303
Permalink: http://arborwebsolutions.com/2009/11/web-design-and-development-the-mile-high-view/
Summary: How sites are made - from idea to launch.

# Web Design and Development: The Mile-High View

With the pace of change on the Web, it can be hard to remember that very
few people actually keep up with the flood of new technologies,
frameworks, and acronyms. Unless you are designing for web-related
companies, it's very likely that your clients will have no idea what
"building a web site" actually entails, or what happens after you're
done designing. In this post, I hope to give you a very high-level
overview of the Web that you can point a client to, so that they can
understand what goes into a web site besides Photoshop or Flash.

### In the Beginning, There Was Networking

Let's start with a bit of history. Before any of this Web malarkey came
about, you had computer networks. That is to say, people connected
individual mainframes (because personal computers didn't exist yet) with
cables so they could talk to each other. PC's came along, and offices
started connecting a building's PCs together so they could talk. Then
something really revolutionary happened: people connected one office
network with another. Lo and behold, the basis of the Internet as we
know it was born. At its heart, the Internet is a network of networks.
In most cases, that smaller network is the 1-4 computers you have in
your household, which connect to the larger "Internet" network through
your router or cable modem or what have you. There is no "center" of the
Internet, no overarching computer directing everything; it's just
millions of small networks like the one in your house or office
connecting with one another. There are systems set up to make it so that
if your computer says "Connect me with computer XYZ," it can find a way
to make that connection, but those systems (think TCP/IP, routing, etc.)
are too complicated to talk about here.

### And on the Second Day, He Created HTML

So the Internet existed, but the Web as we know it did not. The Internet
in those days was good for only a few things: email, bulletin boards,
and [Usenet][], among others. Then along came [Tim Berners-Lee][] with
his description of a new acronym: HTML. HyperText Markup Language
allowed the first web designers (geeky scientists) to create the first
web pages. Think of HTML like formatting in Microsoft Word; the words
you write are all there, but Word / HTML let you give them some extra
meaning. HTML allowed page creators to define their text as paragraphs,
bulleted lists, numbered lists, tables of data, and more. Most
importantly, HTML allowed page creators to link one page to another -
the "HyperText" part of the name - so that related documents could be
found quickly and easily. As I mentioned before, the first users of HTML
were geeky scientists. HTML let them format their research papers, and
link their papers to the papers they cited. That was about it; plain
HTML doesn't have any real ability to "style" a page outside of
identifying what's a paragraph and what is something more specialized.
So the Web was a sea of text, without even a single image in sight.

### And Then There Was CSS

A few years later, competing ideas about how to give pages some style
were merged into a single system, CSS. "Cascading Style Sheets" let page
creators make their pages prettier by defining how the "elements" of
HTML (lists, paragraphs, etc.) should be displayed. The page creator
could now say that all text in paragraphs should be red, that lists
should be bulleted with little squares instead of circles, and to say
how tall or wide a certain piece of content should be on the screen.
Browser makers had added this functionality into their programs (like
Netscape Navigator or Internet Explorer) for a while by this point, but
CSS did something radical: **it separated the content to be displayed
from the rules about how to display it**. Using CSS, a designer could
write two style sheets that made very different looks out of a single
HTML page, without making any changes to the HTML. And yet, despite the
promise of CSS, it started out poorly implemented in many browsers, so
that what looked fine in, say, Internet Explorer 3 was completely broken
in Netscape Navigator 4. So, instead of CSS, many designers (since it
was now actually possible to "design" a page!) opted to use HTML's table
ability to lay out all their content. The idea was to use a website like
an Excel spreadsheet - make the columns and rows whatever width and
height you need, and then fill in each "cell" of the table with an
image, or some text, until you get what you want. This led to some
nice-looking designs, but ***completely and totally broke the original
ideas of HTML***. In a table-based design, the HTML doesn't have any
meaning at all; everything is just a table cell. If the designer you are
talking with keeps telling you that "table-based design" is a bad thing,
that's why. Using HTML together with CSS makes a site that loads faster
and that actually has some meaning to machines (like Google!), instead
of a giant spreadsheet. After all, would you ever try to make artwork or
write an article in Excel?

### Putting it all together

So, we've got networks, HTML pages, and CSS stylesheets. How do they all
fit together? If someone wants a site, they first buy a **domain name**.
Buying a domain name gives you the right to assign the name to a
particular computer anywhere in the world, of your own choosing. A
system called DNS ("Domain Name System," not very original, I agree)
informs all of the world's connected networks of where you pointed that
name, so that when someone's computer says "*Anyone know how to get to
arborwebsolutions.com?*", DNS can say "*Sure, it's at computer XYZ over
there.*" Computer XYZ, meanwhile, is running a program called a **Web
server**. "Server" is a fancy name that scares people, but all it really
means is that computer XYZ is sitting around listening to its wire for
anyone to say "*Hey, I need the stuff for arborwebsolutions.com,*" and
once it hears that, it will throw that stuff over the wire. This is what
people mean when they say you need to buy "**Web hosting**" - you need
to pay a company to run a computer with server software listening for
your domain name, and handing out those files when someone asks for
them. You could run your own server right in your living room - plenty
of geeks do - but that's generally more responsibility than most people
want to take on. Your monthly hosting charge also means that whoever
owns the computer is going to fix things when they break, and generally
keep an eye on things for you. If they're a hosting company worth the
money you pay them, at least. Side note: "Servers" aren't just for Web
sites. There are email servers that sit around listening for people to
say "Hey! Get this letter to Jane Doe!". There are file servers, usually
in offices, that sit around waiting for someone to say "I need that
presentation file from last week." Server programs are everywhere, and
every time you have a computer interaction with another computer, you're
probably talking to a server.

### Fifth Floor, CGI and Friends

Back to the technology. While CSS was taking shape, the Web also saw the
rise of CGI, or "Common Gateway Interface," abilities. (Note that this
is not the same CGI as in movie special effects; that's "Computer
Generated Imagery." There are only so many combinations of three letters
out there.) CGI allowed a programmer to write a program that sat on a
Web server and did things more complicated than just handing someone an
HTML file or a CSS sheet. With CGI, you could fill out a "form" - those
collections of text boxes that let you do things like buy a book on
Amazon or log in to Facebook - and do something with that information on
the server - like telling Joe in inventory to charge your card and mail
you a book, or taking you to your home page on Facebook. CGI isn't a
"language" in itself, it's just a system, and there are dozens of
programming languages that can talk CGI. Hand-in-hand with CGI is the
use of databases. Databases let a server hold on to the information you
put in those forms, and CGI can either store information into the
database or get it back out as needed. So when you make an account at
Amazon, they're holding all of your account info in a database. When you
log in, Amazon remembers all sorts of information about you by pulling
it out of the database again. Databases let you do more than just
accounts, though. If you've ever used blogging software like Wordpress,
Blogger, Joomla!, or any of the dozens of other blog types out there
(that includes Facebook status updates or Twitter tweets), you've used a
database to store your articles. All a blog is doing is storing your
articles in the database, and then pulling out the most recent ones
whenever someone comes to your website. So you've heard of fancy new
tools like **PHP**, or **Ruby on Rails**, or **Django**? They're
basically just variations on the CGI / database idea. Sure, they're
a*lot* more complicated than that, but it gives you an idea of what your
designer / developer is babbling about.

### That's It?

Yep, more or less that's all there is to the Web. I've left out a metric
ton of stuff, but I can always come back to that later. So, when you
hire a designer to make a site from scratch, here's what they're
basically doing:

1.  Find an appropriate domain name and buy it (a challenge in its own
    right), and point it to the hosting server;
2.  Take all of your content (you did give them your content, right?)
    and mark it up in HTML;
3.  Write CSS stylesheets that turn that content into a nice-looking
    website;
4.  Figure out any CGI / database things that need to be done, and set
    them up (usually called "back-end" work).

"That's so simple!" some clients will say. "I could do that myself!"
It's true! You don't need a license to be a web designer, and that's the
way it was always intended. But when most people with this mindset start
trying to learn HTML and CSS, they end up creating nightmarish pages
that put MySpace to shame. Knowing the tools isn't enough - you also
have to know how best to apply them. Owning a hammer isn't enough to
make you a craftsman, and hitting a few nails with it once or twice
doesn't make you a master carpenter.

### What about Dreamweaver?

Dreamweaver is just a program that helps people write HTML and CSS.
That's it - the Web does not require Dreamweaver to operate; you can
make an entire website in Notepad if you want, as long as you save the
HTML file as ".html" and the CSS file as ".css". Dreamweaver does make
things a bit easier by letting you "preview" your site as you code and
type things wherever you want in that preview, but remember the
foundations of HTML and CSS - text content on one side, presentation on
the other. Dreamweaver has a hard time doing that; the sites it creates
using those "visual tools" end up like the spreadsheets I mentioned
earlier. Any good designer should be able to make a beautiful site
without ever touching Dreamweaver or its ilk. That's why the design
industry generally view Dreamweaver as a crutch for people who don't yet
know what they're doing. And with that, I bring this post to a close.
Have you found this article helpful? Informative? Please leave a comment
below, and I'll be sure to answer your questions (and if they're good
questions, I'll even write another post about them).

  [Usenet]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usenet
  [Tim Berners-Lee]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_berners-lee
